ELEC-2110. Computer-Aided Analysis
Object oriented programming in C++ covering most of the basic concepts. Development of Classes for
matrix operations, complex numbers, etc. The rest of the course covers class development for a set of
numerical schemes that include: Gauss-Jordan Method for solving Linear Simultaneous Algebraic
Equations; Matrix inversion; Root finding using the Newton-Raphson and the half-interval methods; Lin-
Bairstow method for Roots of Polynomials; Least-squares fitting; Numerical Integration using the
Trapezoidal and Simpson’s 1/3 rule; Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations of any order using Euler,
Improved Euler and the fourth-order Runge-Kutta methods. (Corequisites: MATH-2780 and MATH-2790)
(3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-2170.Digital Logic Design I
Boolean algebra and logic gates; simplification of Boolean functions; arithmetic operations; analysis and
design of combinatorial logic circuits with SSI, MSI, and LSI; sequential logic components; registers;
counters and memory units; analysis and synthesis of sequential synchronous and asynchronous
networks. (Co-requisites: MATH-2780 and MATH-2790) (3 lecture, 2 Laboratory/tutorial hours or
equivalent a week.)

ELEC-2200. Circuit Analysis
Sinusoidal steady-state analysis; complex power in single and three-phase systems; magnetically coupled
circuits; circuit analysis in the s-domain; frequency response; two-port networks; and computer-aided
analysis and design. (3 lecture, 3.0 laboratory/tutorial hours a week.) (Prerequisite: GENG-2340.) (Credit
cannot be obtained for ELEC-2200 and ELEC-2140.)

ELEC-2240. Signals and Systems
Discrete and Continuous-Time Signals and Systems, Discrete and Continuous-Time Linear Time-Invariant
Systems, System Analysis in Time Domain, System Analysis in Frequency Domain, Convolution,
Differential Equation Models, Fourier series, the Fourier Transform, the Laplace Transform and it's
Applications, Sampling of Systems. (Prerequisites: MATH-2780 and MATH-2790) (3 lecture, 1.5 laboratory
hours and 1.5 tutorial hours a week.)

ELEC-2250. Physical Electronics
This course covers crystal structures. properties of semiconductor materials. Schrodinger wave
equation. energy band theory. intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors. charge carriers in
semiconductors. thermal equilibrium carrier concentrations. carrier transport mechanisms. non-
equilibrium excess carriers in semiconductors, Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistors
(MOSFET), and Bipolar Junction Transistors (BJT). (Prerequisites: MATH-2780 and MATH-2790) (3 lecture,
2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-2260. Electronics I
Classification of signals; introduction to diodes; rectifier circuits, Zener diode, limiting and clamping
circuits; Op amp amplifier configurations, Op amp distortion, non ideal op amp performance; active
filters, Tow-Thomas Biquad; Introduction to data converters; oscillators; super-diodes; pulse generation.
(Prerequisites: MATH-2780 and MATH-2790) (3 lecture, 1.5 laboratory hours and 1.5 tutorial hours a
week.)

ELEC-2280. Electromagnetic Fields
Static electric fields; Coulomb’s law, Gauss’s law and its applications; electric potential; dielectrics;
boundary conditions; capacitance; resistance; steady electric currents, current density, boundary
condition for current density, equation of continuity and Kirchhoff’s law; power dissipation; static
magnetic fields; Biot-Savart’s law, Ampere’s law; vector magnetic potential; magnetic dipole; magnetic
circuits; boundary conditions for magnetic fields; magnetic forces and torque; induction current.
(Prerequisites: MATH-2780 and MATH-2790) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a
week.)

Note: Students must have completed all the 1st year courses and at least ten (10) of their 2nd year
courses before being allowed to register in the 3rd year courses, including all pre-requisite courses
required for registration in the 3rd year courses.

ELEC-3130.Electromechanical Systems
Machinery principles; transformers; AC machinery fundamentals; synchronous generators; synchronous
and induction motors; DC machinery fundamentals; DC motors; electromechanical energy conversion;
three-phase concepts; special-purpose motors. (Prerequisites: MATH-2780, MATH-2790, ELEC-2250.) (3
lecture, 2 laboratory hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-3160. Electronics II
Analog amplification; small-signal modeling of analog circuits; differential-amplifier topology; BJT,
MOSFET and JFET differential amplifiers; frequency response and time-dependent circuit behavior;
feedback and stability; multistage and power amplifiers; active filters and oscillators; use of CAD in
modern transistor circuit design. (Prerequisites: MATH-2780, MATH-2790 and ELEC-2260.) (3 lecture, 1.5
laboratory hours and 1 hour tutorial.)

ELEC-3240. Control Systems I
Transfer function and state-space model for linear time-invariant systems; linearization of nonlinear
systems; controllability and observability; transient performance; stability; tracking performance;
Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) control design; frequency response and root locus (Prerequisites:
MATH-2780, MATH-2790, ELEC-3130.) (3 lecture, 1.5 laboratory hours and 1.5 tutorial hours a week.)

ELEC-3270. Microprocessors
Microprocessor systems (8 and 16 bit) and architecture; data representations, arithmetic units; memory
structures; complex instruction set; accumulator, index, and memory reference instructions; addressing
modes; stacks, subroutines, and other instructions; interrupts and timing; interfacing I/O devices and
data converters; software development systems and assemblers; code implementation on
microcontrollers. (Prerequisites: MATH-2780, MATH-2790, ELEC-2170, ELEC-3160 and ELEC-3300.) (3
lecture, 3 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-3290. Analog Communications
Analog communication systems; information measure; signals and noise; Fourier transform and spectra;
bandwidth of signals; analog modulation and demodulation systems; AM, FM, TV transmitters and
receivers, detector circuits. (Prerequisites: MATH-2780, MATH-2790 and ELEC-3160.) (3 lecture, 1.5
laboratory hours and 1.5 tutorial hours a week.)

ELEC-3300. Digital Logic Design II
Contemporary digital system design; programmable logic; device architectures; reconfigurable
computing; design entry methods; VHDL (Hardware Description Language); Electronic Design Automation
(EDA) tools; combinational and sequential logic design, implementation using programmable logic
devices. (Prerequisites: MATH-2780, MATH-2790 and ELEC-2170.) (3 lecture, 3 laboratory/tutorial hours
or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4000. Capstone Design Project
Team based design project satisfying the "CAPSTONE DESIGN PROJECT REQUIREMENTS", available from
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. Gives the student significant design experience
and builds on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier course work. Provides an exposure to
teamwork so as to emulate a typical professional design environment. Computers are to be used both in
the execution of the design methodology and the management of the design project. (Prerequisites:
completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (6 laboratory hours
per week; that must be completed over two consecutive winter and summer terms.) 2 semester course.
(This is an experiential learning course.)

ELEC-4100. Directed Study I
The objective of this course is to provide an opportunity for the exceptional fourth-year student with a
demonstrated record of scholarship to work in close accord with a faculty member on a project of mutual
interest. A written report and oral presentation are required for evaluation by the Department. A
Directed Study course may be taken by an eligible student in place of a fourth-year unspecified course.
(Prerequisite: an 11.0 GPA or better in the third year and permission of the Department Head.) (For the
purposes of assigning grades and determining averages, 3 lecture hours per week have been allocated to
the course.)

ELEC-4190. Digital Communications
Digital communication systems; discrete Fourier transform; sampling theory; A/D converters; digital
modulation; time-division multiplexing; packet transmission; random processes and spectral analysis for
digital systems; error probabilities; noise; introduction to information theory. (Prerequisites: completion
of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 2
laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4200. Directed Study II
The objective of this course is to provide an opportunity for the exceptional fourth-year student with a
demonstrated record of scholarship to work in close accord with a faculty member on a project of mutual
interest. A written report and oral presentation are required for evaluation. A Directed Study course may
be taken by an eligible student in place of a fourth-year general option course. (Prerequisite: an 11.0 GPA
or better in the third year and permission of the Department Head.) (For the purposes of assigning
grades and determining averages, 3 lecture hours per week have been allocated to the course.)

ELEC-4310. Control Systems II
Stability and performance analysis in frequency domain; lead-lag control design in frequency domain;
elementary observer and control design in state space; z- transformation and z-plane analysis; direct and
indirect discrete-time control design; implementation of digital control. (Prerequisites: completion of all
Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 1.5 laboratory hours and
1.5 tutorial hours a week.)

ELEC-4320. EM Waves and Radiating Systems
Maxwell equations; time varying potentials; time harmonic fields; electromagnetic wave propagation;
wave polarization; power and Poynting vector; transmission lines; Smith chart; rectangular waveguides;
waveguide current and mode excitation; dipole antenna; small loop antennas; antenna characteristics;
antenna arrays. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year
and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 2 tutorial hours a week.)

ELEC-4330. Digital Integrated Circuit Design
Physics and modelling of MOSFETs; fabrication and layout of CMOS integrated circuits; the CMOS
inverter: analysis and design; switching properties of MOSFETs; static logic gates; transmission gate logic
circuits; dynamic logic circuit concepts; CMOS dynamic logic families; CMOS differential logic families;
design methodologies and CAD tools; deep-submicron implementations. (Prerequisites: completion of all
Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial
hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4340. Automotive Electronics
Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) controllers and limit cycle controllers; fundamentals of digital
control of Spark-Ignition (SI) engine; MPC555 Motorola Power PC/dSPACE based SI engine control
system; Motronic engine management system; automotive sensors and actuators; vehicle motion control
including Antilock Braking System (ABS); Controller Area Network (CAN); Time-Triggered CAN (TTCAN);
FlexRay. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd
year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4350. Microelectromechanical Systems
MicroElectroMechanical System (MEMS) technology overview and design process; microfabrication and
process integration; lumped element modeling; 3-D finite element modeling; energy conserving
transducers (electrostatics); linear and nonlinear system dynamics; elasticity, stress, strain, material
properties; structure analysis, beams, plates; MEMS sensing and actuation; material case studies; MEMS
design methodology; device modeling. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses
from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4360. Computer Communications
Protocols and architecture; data transmission; data encoding; interfacing; data link control; multiplexing,
ISO reference model; wide-area networks; circuit switching; packet switching; ATM and frame relay; LAN
technology and systems; internet protocols; inter-network operation; transport protocols; network
security. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd
year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4370. Intelligent Computing
Computing models of the human mind. Neural computing models and learning algorithms. Fuzzy set
theory and fuzzy systems. Evolutionary computing. Applications of intelligent computing. (Prerequisites:
completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year in an Engineering
program or fourth year standing in a Computer Science program.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours
or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4380. Coding and Information Theory
Abstract algebra, number theory and complexity theory; simple cryptosystems; Shannon's theory;
entropy and information theory; data encryption standard, RSA system and factoring; public-key
cryptosystems; signature schemes; hash functions; key distribution and key agreement; identification
schemes; authentication codes; access structures and general secret sharing; pseudo-random number
generation; zero-knowledge proofs (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from
1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4390. Multimedia Systems
Multimedia signals: Audio fundamentals; the Human visual system and perception; multimedia data
acquisition. Multimedia signal compression: Transforms and subband decomposition; text
representation; digital text, audio, image, and video compression. Multimedia signal processing: Digital
audio, image, and video processing. Multimedia systems. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical
Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or
equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4400. Wireless Communications
Introduction to wireless communications; cellular system design fundamentals; propagation path loss;
fading and multi-path propagation; modulation techniques; diversity; coding and equalization; speech
coding for wireless communications; multiple access networking, wireless communications protocols;
satellite communication systems. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st
year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4430. Embedded System Design
Embedded hardware and software systems; introduction to embedded systems; custom single-purpose
processors, hardware design; general-purpose processors, software, design flow environment and tools,
testing and debugging; standard single-purpose processors, peripherals, memory system design;
interfacing issues, serial and parallel communication, bus standards, protocols and arbitration; exercises
on real world applications; Laboratory implementation on modern Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs) and microcontrollers using associated Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tools. (Prerequisites:
completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 3
laboratory hours a week.)

ELEC-4440. Analog Integrated Circuit Design
Bipolar and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistors (MOSFET) technology; device
characterization; analog circuit modelling; current sinks, sources, and mirrors; differential pairs; current
and voltage amplifiers; differential amplifiers; comparators; operational amplifiers; A/D and D/A
converters; Integrated Circuit (IC) implementation with Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tools.
(Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3
lecture, 3 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4450. Power Electronics
Power diodes; thyristors; power Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistors (MOSFET);
Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistors (IGBT); controlled rectifiers; DC-DC converters; inverters; AC-AC
converters; gate drive circuits; motor drives; r computer simulation of power electronics and motor
drives. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd
year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)
ELEC-4470. Computer Networks Security
Introduction to computer networks security; cryptography; public-key and secret key encryption;
encryption algorithms; network security mechanisms and techniques; security protocols; authentication
and network security services; traditional and emerging Information Technology (IT) security; cyber-
security. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd
year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4480. Digital Computer Architecture
Computer Organization and architecture (32 bit); computer abstraction; reduced instruction set; high
level to assembler level language translation; pipelinable instruction set architectures; speculation and
branch prediction; instruction level parallelism; memory hierarchies, and virtual memory; secondary
storage and I/O; multithreading, multicore, multiple CPU, and clustering; Graphics Processing Unit (GPU).
(Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3
lecture, 3 laboratory/tutorial hours a week.)

ELEC-4490. Sensor and Vision Systems
Basics of sensors and transducers; sensor characteristics and applications; fundamentals of pressure,
temperature, displacement and position sensors; accelerometer physics, strain gauges, and torque
sensors; machine vision; image processing, image enhancement, edge and corner detectors; image
segmentation techniques; image feature extraction and matching; colour models and processing; object
recognition and classification; discussion on camera parameters and calibration; stereo vision, 3D range
imaging techniques. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd
year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours a week.)

ELEC-4500. Power Systems I
Principles of operation, modeling and analysis of electric power systems; complex power, phasors and
per-unit system; three-phase circuits; power transformer and generator modeling; transmission line
parameters; steady-state operation of transmission lines; network matrices and power flow analysis;
introduction to alternative energy sources. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical Engineering courses
from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4570. Fundamentals of Digital Signal Processing
Discrete time signals and systems models and analysis; Z-transform; discrete Fourier transform (DFT); FFT
algorithms; FIR filter design; IIR filter design; stability; realization; hardware and software
implementations; digital signal processing applications. (Prerequisites: completion of all Electrical
Engineering courses from 1st year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or
equivalent a week.)

ELEC-4600. Power Systems II
Advanced analytical tools; analysis of abnormal operation, numerical methods, stability and control;
transient stability and voltage stability; control and monitoring of power systems; dynamics and control
of multi-machine systems; symmetrical faults; symmetrical components; unsymmetrical faults; power
system protection and relaying; economic dispatch; optimal power flow; numerical simulation tools in
power systems. (Prerequisites: ELEC-4500 and completion of all Electrical Engineering courses from 1st
year, 2nd year and 3rd year.) (3 lecture, 2 laboratory/tutorial hours or equivalent a week.)